README.md, before:

# Pharmacy Management System (PharMS)

A comprehensive web-based pharmacy management system for managing medicines, processing prescription requests, and handling delivery workflows with role-based access control.

## Features

### User Features
- User registration with NIC document upload
- Browse medicines with category filtering
- Submit medicine requests with prescription uploads (if required)
- View request history and tracking status
- Process payments with secure card validation
- View delivery status updates

### Admin Features
- Dashboard with system statistics
- Medicine management (Create, Read, Update, Delete)
- Category management
- Review and approve/reject prescription requests
- View prescription and NIC documents
- Manage delivery status
- View payment records
- Generate system reports

## Technology Stack

### Frontend
- React 18
- TailwindCSS for styling
- React Router v6 for navigation
- Axios for HTTP requests
- Context API for state management

### Backend
- Node.js with Express.js
- MongoDB for database
- JWT for authentication
- Bcrypt for password hashing
- Multer for file uploads

## Project Structure

```
pharmacy/
├── client/                 # Frontend application
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── pages/         # Page components
│   │   ├── components/    # Reusable components
│   │   ├── services/      # API service layer
│   │   ├── context/       # Context providers
│   │   ├── utils/         # Utility functions
│   │   └── layouts/       # Layout templates
│   ├── package.json
│   └── vite.config.js
│
├── server/                 # Backend application
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── routes/        # API routes
│   │   ├── controllers/   # Route handlers
│   │   ├── models/        # Database schemas
│   │   ├── middlewares/   # Custom middlewares
│   │   ├── config/        # Configuration
│   │   └── app.js         # Express app setup
│   ├── package.json
│   └── .env               # Environment variables
│
└── uploads/               # File storage directory
```

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- Node.js (v14 or higher)
- MongoDB (local installation or MongoDB Atlas)
- npm or yarn

### Backend Setup

1. Navigate to server directory:
```bash
cd server
```

2. Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

3. Create `.env` file:
```
MONGODB_URI=mongodb://localhost:27017/pharmacy
JWT_SECRET=your_secret_key_here
PORT=5001
NODE_ENV=development
```

4. Start the server:
```bash
npm start
```
Server will run on `http://localhost:5001`

### Frontend Setup

1. Navigate to client directory:
```bash
cd client
```

2. Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

3. Create `.env` file:
```
VITE_API_URL=http://localhost:5001/api
```

4. Start the development server:
```bash
npm run dev
```
Application will run on `http://localhost:5173`

5. Build for production:
```bash
npm run build
```

## Database Models

### User
- Email (unique)
- Password (hashed with bcrypt)
- Name
- Role (user or admin)
- NIC Document file path
- Timestamps

### Medicine
- Name
- Description
- Price
- Category
- Dosage
- Form (Tablet, Capsule, Syrup, etc.)
- Manufacturer
- Stock quantity
- In stock status
- Prescription required (boolean)
- Image file path
- Timestamps

### Category
- Name (unique)
- Description
- Timestamps

### Request
- User ID
- Medicine ID
- Prescription file path (if required)
- NIC file path
- Status (pending, approved, rejected)
- Payment status (pending, paid, failed)
- Delivery status (pending, shipped, delivered, cancelled)
- Timestamps

### Payment
- Request ID
- Amount
- Card details (last 4 digits only)
- Payment method
- Transaction ID
- Status
- Timestamps

## API Endpoints

### Authentication
- `POST /api/auth/register` - User registration
- `POST /api/auth/login` - User login
- `GET /api/auth/users` - Get all users (admin only)
- `DELETE /api/auth/users/:id` - Delete user (admin only)

### Medicines
- `GET /api/medicines` - List medicines (paginated)
- `GET /api/medicines/:id` - Get medicine details
- `POST /api/medicines` - Create medicine (admin only)
- `PUT /api/medicines/:id` - Update medicine (admin only)
- `DELETE /api/medicines/:id` - Delete medicine (admin only)

### Categories
- `GET /api/categories` - List categories
- `POST /api/categories` - Create category (admin only)
- `PUT /api/categories/:id` - Update category (admin only)
- `DELETE /api/categories/:id` - Delete category (admin only)

### Requests
- `POST /api/requests` - Create request (user)
- `GET /api/requests/user` - Get user's requests (user)
- `GET /api/requests` - Get all requests (admin only)
- `PUT /api/requests/:id/status` - Update request status (admin only)
- `PUT /api/requests/:id/delivery` - Update delivery status (admin only)

### File Uploads
- `POST /api/upload/prescription` - Upload prescription file
- `POST /api/upload/nic` - Upload NIC document
- `POST /api/upload/image` - Upload medicine image

### Payments
- `POST /api/payments` - Process payment
- `GET /api/payments` - Get payment records (admin only)

### Reports
- `GET /api/reports` - Get system statistics (admin only)

## Authentication & Authorization

- JWT token-based authentication with 7-day expiry
- Password hashing with bcrypt (10 salt rounds)
- Role-based access control (user vs admin)
- Protected routes requiring valid JWT token
- NIC document upload during registration for user verification

## Request Workflow

### Non-Prescription Medicine
1. User browses and selects medicine
2. Creates request (auto-approved)
3. Proceeds to payment
4. Admin updates delivery status

### Prescription Medicine
1. User browses and selects medicine
2. Uploads prescription document
3. Request pending admin approval
4. Admin verifies prescription and NIC document
5. Admin approves or rejects
6. If approved, user proceeds to payment
7. Admin updates delivery status

## Validation Rules

- **Email**: Valid email format, unique in database
- **Password**: Minimum 6 characters, bcrypt hashed
- **NIC**: 12 digits or 12 digits + V (Sri Lankan format)
- **Card Number**: 13-19 digits
- **Card Expiry**: MM/YY format, future date
- **CVC**: 3-4 digits
- **Stock**: Non-negative integer

## Security Features

- JWT token-based authentication
- Password hashing with bcrypt
- Role-based access control
- File upload validation (type and size)
- Protected API endpoints
- Data validation on all inputs
- Sensitive data excluded from API responses

## Running the Application

### Development Mode

Terminal 1 - Backend:
```bash
cd server
npm start
```

Terminal 2 - Frontend:
```bash
cd client
npm run dev
```

Access the application at: `http://localhost:5173`

### Production Build

```bash
cd client
npm run build
```

The `dist/` folder contains the production-ready build.

## File Upload

Files are uploaded to the server `/uploads` directory:
- Prescription documents (PDF, images)
- NIC documents (PDF, images)
- Medicine images

Maximum file size: 5MB

## Troubleshooting

### MongoDB Connection Error
- Ensure MongoDB is running: `mongod`
- Check MONGODB_URI in `.env`

### Port Already in Use
- Change PORT in `.env` for backend
- Change port in `vite.config.js` for frontend

### File Upload Issues
- Ensure `/uploads` directory exists and has write permissions
- Check file size (max 5MB)
- Verify file format (images or PDF)

## License

This project is for educational purposes.

## Deployment

### Want to deploy?
1. Ensure `.env` files are properly configured
2. Run `npm run build` in client folder: `cd client && npm run build`
3. Deploy `client/dist` folder to your web hosting service
4. Deploy `server` folder to Node.js hosting (set environment variables on host)
5. Configure MongoDB Atlas connection string
6. Verify all environment variables are set on production server

---

## 🔍 Finding Things

### I want to...

**"Browse the UI"**
→ Frontend runs on [http://localhost:5173](http://localhost:5173)

**"Find a specific page"**
→ Check [client/src/pages/](client/src/pages/) folder

**"Understand a component"**
→ Check [client/src/components/](client/src/components/) folder

**"Call an API"**
→ Check [client/src/services/](client/src/services/) folder

**"Modify business logic"**
→ Check [server/src/controllers/](server/src/controllers/) folder

**"Change database schema"**
→ Check [server/src/models/](server/src/models/) folder

**"Add a new route"**
→ Check [server/src/routes/](server/src/routes/) folder

---

## 📊 Project Status

| Category | Status | Details |
|----------|--------|---------|
| **Features** | ✅ 97% | All core features complete |
| **Testing** | ✅ 100% | Manual verification passed |
| **Build** | ✅ 100% | No errors, optimized |
| **Documentation** | ✅ 100% | All features documented |
| **Security** | ✅ 100% | JWT, BCrypt, RBAC implemented |
| **Production** | ✅ 100% | Ready to deploy |

---

## 🚀 Key Features Implemented

### User Features
- ✅ Register & login with secure JWT
- ✅ Browse medicines with search/filter
- ✅ Create prescription requests
- ✅ Upload prescription files
- ✅ Make online payments
- ✅ Track request status
- ✅ View delivery status
- ✅ Personal dashboard with stats

### Admin Features
- ✅ Add/edit/delete medicines
- ✅ Manage categories
- ✅ Review & approve requests
- ✅ Update delivery status
- ✅ View payment history
- ✅ User management
- ✅ System metrics dashboard

### Technical Features
- ✅ Pagination on all lists
- ✅ File upload with validation
- ✅ Global error handling
- ✅ Role-based access control
- ✅ Responsive design
- ✅ Dark theme with clinical colors
- ✅ Toast notifications

---

## 📞 Getting Help

### Common Issues

**"Servers won't start"**
- Check Node.js is installed: `node --version`
- Check ports aren't in use (5001, 5173)
- Check MongoDB connection string in `.env`

**"Build errors"**
- Clear node_modules: `rm -r node_modules`
- Reinstall: `npm install`
- Check for syntax errors in recent changes

**"Features not showing"**
- Check backend is running
- Open browser DevTools (F12)
- Check Network tab for API errors
- Check Console tab for JavaScript errors

**"Database not connecting"**
- Verify MongoDB Atlas URL in `.env`
- Check internet connection
- Verify IP whitelist in MongoDB Atlas

---

## 📈 Metrics & Performance

```
Frontend Build Size:    350KB → 101KB gzipped (Excellent)
Page Load Time:         <2 seconds on 5Mbps
API Response Time:      <500ms average
Database Queries:       Properly indexed
Memory Usage:           <200MB typical
```

---

## ✨ What's Included

### Frontend
- React 18 with hooks
- React Router for navigation
- Context API for state management
- Axios for HTTP requests
- TailwindCSS for styling
- Vite for fast builds

### Backend
- Node.js with Express
- MongoDB for data storage
- JWT for authentication
- BCrypt for password hashing
- Multer for file uploads
- Error handling middleware

### Database
- MongoDB Atlas (cloud)
- 4 collections: User, Medicine, Request, Category
- Proper indexing for performance
- Auto-backups in MongoDB Atlas

---

## 🎁 Next Steps

### To Add Features
1. Create new Route in server
2. Create new Controller function
3. Create new Service in client
4. Create new React component/page
5. Test in browser
6. Update documentation as needed

### To Scale
1. Add caching layer (Redis)
2. Add CDN for static files
3. Use Docker for containerization
4. Set up CI/CD pipeline
5. Add monitoring and logging

---

## 📚 Version Info

- **Project**: PharMS (Pharmacy Management System)
- **Version**: 1.0
- **Status**: Production Ready ✅
- **Last Updated**: February 18, 2026
- **Frontend**: React 18
- **Backend**: Node.js + Express
- **Database**: MongoDB Atlas

---

## 🎯 Quick Command Reference

```bash
# Start backend
cd server && npm start

# Start frontend
cd client && npm run dev

# Build for production
cd client && npm run build

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Check Node version
node --version

# Check npm version
npm --version
```

---

## ✅ Final Checklist

Before deploying:
- [ ] Both servers start without errors
- [ ] Can login and create account
- [ ] Medicine browsing works
- [ ] Can submit request
- [ ] Admin can approve requests
- [ ] Payment page loads
- [ ] Dashboards show stats
- [ ] No console errors (F12)

---

**That's everything!** 

Pick a document above and start reading. Happy coding! 🚀

Commit message:

Readme and .env.sample added

README.md, after:

# Pharmacy Management System (PharMS)

A comprehensive web-based pharmacy management system for managing medicines, processing prescription requests, and handling delivery workflows with role-based access control.

## Features

### User Features
- User registration with NIC document upload
- Browse medicines with category filtering
- Submit medicine requests with prescription uploads (if required)
- View request history and tracking status
- Process payments with secure card validation
- View delivery status updates

### Admin Features
- Dashboard with system statistics
- Medicine management (Create, Read, Update, Delete)
- Category management
- Review and approve/reject prescription requests
- View prescription and NIC documents
- Manage delivery status
- View payment records
- Generate system reports

## Technology Stack

### Frontend
- React 18
- TailwindCSS for styling
- React Router v6 for navigation
- Axios for HTTP requests
- Context API for state management

### Backend
- Node.js with Express.js
- MongoDB for database
- JWT for authentication
- Bcrypt for password hashing
- Multer for file uploads

## Project Structure

```
pharmacy/
├── client/                 # Frontend application
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── pages/         # Page components
│   │   ├── components/    # Reusable components
│   │   ├── services/      # API service layer
│   │   ├── context/       # Context providers
│   │   ├── utils/         # Utility functions
│   │   └── layouts/       # Layout templates
│   ├── package.json
│   └── vite.config.js
│
├── server/                 # Backend application
│   ├── src/
│   │   ├── routes/        # API routes
│   │   ├── controllers/   # Route handlers
│   │   ├── models/        # Database schemas
│   │   ├── middlewares/   # Custom middlewares
│   │   ├── config/        # Configuration
│   │   └── app.js         # Express app setup
│   ├── package.json
│   └── .env               # Environment variables
│
└── uploads/               # File storage directory
```

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- Node.js (v14 or higher)
- MongoDB (local installation or MongoDB Atlas)
- npm or yarn

### Backend Setup

1. Navigate to server directory:
```bash
cd server
```

2. Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

3. Create `.env` file by copying the sample:
```bash
cp .env.sample .env
```
Then edit `.env` with your values (MongoDB URI, JWT secret, etc.)

4. Start the server:
```bash
npm start
```
Server will run on `http://localhost:5001`

### Frontend Setup

1. Navigate to client directory:
```bash
cd client
```

2. Install dependencies:
```bash
npm install
```

3. Create `.env.local` file by copying the sample:
```bash
cp .env.sample .env.local
```
This is pre-configured for local development

4. Start the development server:
```bash
npm run dev
```
Application will run on `http://localhost:5173`

5. Build for production:
```bash
npm run build
```

## Database Models

### User
- Email (unique)
- Password (hashed with bcrypt)
- Name
- Role (user or admin)
- NIC Document file path
- Timestamps

### Medicine
- Name
- Description
- Price
- Category
- Dosage
- Form (Tablet, Capsule, Syrup, etc.)
- Manufacturer
- Stock quantity
- In stock status
- Prescription required (boolean)
- Image file path
- Timestamps

### Category
- Name (unique)
- Description
- Timestamps

### Request
- User ID
- Medicine ID
- Prescription file path (if required)
- NIC file path
- Status (pending, approved, rejected)
- Payment status (pending, paid, failed)
- Delivery status (pending, shipped, delivered, cancelled)
- Timestamps

### Payment
- Request ID
- Amount
- Card details (last 4 digits only)
- Payment method
- Transaction ID
- Status
- Timestamps

## API Endpoints

### Authentication
- `POST /api/auth/register` - User registration
- `POST /api/auth/login` - User login
- `GET /api/auth/users` - Get all users (admin only)
- `DELETE /api/auth/users/:id` - Delete user (admin only)

### Medicines
- `GET /api/medicines` - List medicines (paginated)
- `GET /api/medicines/:id` - Get medicine details
- `POST /api/medicines` - Create medicine (admin only)
- `PUT /api/medicines/:id` - Update medicine (admin only)
- `DELETE /api/medicines/:id` - Delete medicine (admin only)

### Categories
- `GET /api/categories` - List categories
- `POST /api/categories` - Create category (admin only)
- `PUT /api/categories/:id` - Update category (admin only)
- `DELETE /api/categories/:id` - Delete category (admin only)

### Requests
- `POST /api/requests` - Create request (user)
- `GET /api/requests/user` - Get user's requests (user)
- `GET /api/requests` - Get all requests (admin only)
- `PUT /api/requests/:id/status` - Update request status (admin only)
- `PUT /api/requests/:id/delivery` - Update delivery status (admin only)

### File Uploads
- `POST /api/upload/prescription` - Upload prescription file
- `POST /api/upload/nic` - Upload NIC document
- `POST /api/upload/image` - Upload medicine image

### Payments
- `POST /api/payments` - Process payment
- `GET /api/payments` - Get payment records (admin only)

### Reports
- `GET /api/reports` - Get system statistics (admin only)

## Authentication & Authorization

- JWT token-based authentication with 7-day expiry
- Password hashing with bcrypt (10 salt rounds)
- Role-based access control (user vs admin)
- Protected routes requiring valid JWT token
- NIC document upload during registration for user verification

## Request Workflow

### Non-Prescription Medicine
1. User browses and selects medicine
2. Creates request (auto-approved)
3. Proceeds to payment
4. Admin updates delivery status

### Prescription Medicine
1. User browses and selects medicine
2. Uploads prescription document
3. Request pending admin approval
4. Admin verifies prescription and NIC document
5. Admin approves or rejects
6. If approved, user proceeds to payment
7. Admin updates delivery status

## Validation Rules

- **Email**: Valid email format, unique in database
- **Password**: Minimum 6 characters, bcrypt hashed
- **NIC**: 12 digits or 12 digits + V (Sri Lankan format)
- **Card Number**: 13-19 digits
- **Card Expiry**: MM/YY format, future date
- **CVC**: 3-4 digits
- **Stock**: Non-negative integer

## Security Features

- JWT token-based authentication
- Password hashing with bcrypt
- Role-based access control
- File upload validation (type and size)
- Protected API endpoints
- Data validation on all inputs
- Sensitive data excluded from API responses

## Running the Application

### Development Mode

Terminal 1 - Backend:
```bash
cd server
npm start
```

Terminal 2 - Frontend:
```bash
cd client
npm run dev
```

Access the application at: `http://localhost:5173`

### Production Build

```bash
cd client
npm run build
```

The `dist/` folder contains the production-ready build.

## File Upload

Files are uploaded to the server `/uploads` directory:
- Prescription documents (PDF, images)
- NIC documents (PDF, images)
- Medicine images

Maximum file size: 5MB

## Troubleshooting

### MongoDB Connection Error
- Ensure MongoDB is running: `mongod`
- Check MONGODB_URI in `.env`

### Port Already in Use
- Change PORT in `.env` for backend
- Change port in `vite.config.js` for frontend

### File Upload Issues
- Ensure `/uploads` directory exists and has write permissions
- Check file size (max 5MB)
- Verify file format (images or PDF)

## License

This project is for educational purposes.

## Deployment

### Want to deploy?
1. Ensure `.env` files are properly configured
2. Run `npm run build` in client folder: `cd client && npm run build`
3. Deploy `client/dist` folder to your web hosting service
4. Deploy `server` folder to Node.js hosting (set environment variables on host)
5. Configure MongoDB Atlas connection string
6. Verify all environment variables are set on production server

---

## 🔍 Finding Things

### I want to...

**"Browse the UI"**
→ Frontend runs on [http://localhost:5173](http://localhost:5173)

**"Find a specific page"**
→ Check [client/src/pages/](client/src/pages/) folder

**"Understand a component"**
→ Check [client/src/components/](client/src/components/) folder

**"Call an API"**
→ Check [client/src/services/](client/src/services/) folder

**"Modify business logic"**
→ Check [server/src/controllers/](server/src/controllers/) folder

**"Change database schema"**
→ Check [server/src/models/](server/src/models/) folder

**"Add a new route"**
→ Check [server/src/routes/](server/src/routes/) folder

---

## 📊 Project Status

| Category | Status | Details |
|----------|--------|---------|
| **Features** | ✅ 97% | All core features complete |
| **Testing** | ✅ 100% | Manual verification passed |
| **Build** | ✅ 100% | No errors, optimized |
| **Documentation** | ✅ 100% | All features documented |
| **Security** | ✅ 100% | JWT, BCrypt, RBAC implemented |
| **Production** | ✅ 100% | Ready to deploy |

---

## 🚀 Key Features Implemented

### User Features
- ✅ Register & login with secure JWT
- ✅ Browse medicines with search/filter
- ✅ Create prescription requests
- ✅ Upload prescription files
- ✅ Make online payments
- ✅ Track request status
- ✅ View delivery status
- ✅ Personal dashboard with stats

### Admin Features
- ✅ Add/edit/delete medicines
- ✅ Manage categories
- ✅ Review & approve requests
- ✅ Update delivery status
- ✅ View payment history
- ✅ User management
- ✅ System metrics dashboard

### Technical Features
- ✅ Pagination on all lists
- ✅ File upload with validation
- ✅ Global error handling
- ✅ Role-based access control
- ✅ Responsive design
- ✅ Dark theme with clinical colors
- ✅ Toast notifications

---

## 📞 Getting Help

### Common Issues

**"Servers won't start"**
- Check Node.js is installed: `node --version`
- Check ports aren't in use (5001, 5173)
- Check MongoDB connection string in `.env`

**"Build errors"**
- Clear node_modules: `rm -r node_modules`
- Reinstall: `npm install`
- Check for syntax errors in recent changes

**"Features not showing"**
- Check backend is running
- Open browser DevTools (F12)
- Check Network tab for API errors
- Check Console tab for JavaScript errors

**"Database not connecting"**
- Verify MongoDB Atlas URL in `.env`
- Check internet connection
- Verify IP whitelist in MongoDB Atlas

---

## 📈 Metrics & Performance

```
Frontend Build Size:    350KB → 101KB gzipped (Excellent)
Page Load Time:         <2 seconds on 5Mbps
API Response Time:      <500ms average
Database Queries:       Properly indexed
Memory Usage:           <200MB typical
```

---

## ✨ What's Included

### Frontend
- React 18 with hooks
- React Router for navigation
- Context API for state management
- Axios for HTTP requests
- TailwindCSS for styling
- Vite for fast builds

### Backend
- Node.js with Express
- MongoDB for data storage
- JWT for authentication
- BCrypt for password hashing
- Multer for file uploads
- Error handling middleware

### Database
- MongoDB Atlas (cloud)
- 4 collections: User, Medicine, Request, Category
- Proper indexing for performance
- Auto-backups in MongoDB Atlas

---

## 🎁 Next Steps

### To Add Features
1. Create new Route in server
2. Create new Controller function
3. Create new Service in client
4. Create new React component/page
5. Test in browser
6. Update documentation as needed

### To Scale
1. Add caching layer (Redis)
2. Add CDN for static files
3. Use Docker for containerization
4. Set up CI/CD pipeline
5. Add monitoring and logging

---

## 📚 Version Info

- **Project**: PharMS (Pharmacy Management System)
- **Version**: 1.0
- **Status**: Production Ready ✅
- **Last Updated**: February 18, 2026
- **Frontend**: React 18
- **Backend**: Node.js + Express
- **Database**: MongoDB Atlas

---

## 🎯 Quick Command Reference

```bash
# Start backend
cd server && npm start

# Start frontend
cd client && npm run dev

# Build for production
cd client && npm run build

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Check Node version
node --version

# Check npm version
npm --version
```

---

## ✅ Final Checklist

Before deploying:
- [ ] Both servers start without errors
- [ ] Can login and create account
- [ ] Medicine browsing works
- [ ] Can submit request
- [ ] Admin can approve requests
- [ ] Payment page loads
- [ ] Dashboards show stats
- [ ] No console errors (F12)

---

**That's everything!** 

Pick a document above and start reading. Happy coding! 🚀
